the proper adjustment of the two
bearings in the hub assembly is one of
the most important aspects of the
installation process
excessive tightening of the adjustment
nut otherwise known as excessive preload
can cause the type of rapid deep
spalling shown in these pictures this
deep spalling occurs when the direct
contact between rollers and Raceway
caused by excessive preload superheats
the bearing softening the material and
allowing chunks to be torn away from the
raceway and rollers during operation
on the other side of the spectrum
loosening the adjustment not too much
will cause excessive end play in the
bearings allowing a rocking motion that
disrupts the even distribution of force
along the rollers this too can cause
bearing failure resulting in damage
similar to that in this picture as you
can see the damage is restricted to one
section of the Raceway that underwent
extreme stress due to excessive end play
the key then is to hit the sweet spot
between too much and play and not enough
for Timken bearings this means achieving
an end play between point zero zero one
inches and point zero zero five inches
to help Timken has established an easily
measurable three-step adjustment
procedure while rotating the rotor to
ensure proper seating of the rollers
induced preload by using a torque wrench
to tighten the adjusting nut to 50
foot-pounds then loosen the adjusting
nut one full turn while continuing to
rotate this rotor retorque the nut this
time to ten foot-pounds once again
loosen the adjusting nut this time by
only one six to one fourth turn when
step one is complete place the bottle
cap type stamping over the adjusting nut
and properly install and secure the
cotter pin to prevent the nut from
backing off
use a dial indicator to measure n bleh
mount the indicators base as close to
the center of the hub rotor as possible
with the indicator tip against the end
of the spindle set the indicator to zero
grasp the rotor at three o'clock and
nine o'clock and begin oscillating the
rotor back and forth while oscillating
push the rotor in and read the dial
indicator then pull the rotor while
still oscillating and read the dial
indicator again the bearing n play is
equal to the total indicator movement
which should be between point zero zero
one and point zero zero five inches if
you have not achieved the desired end
play repeat steps one and two
once you achieve the desired end play
the adjustment process is complete when
properly done this simple step by step
adjustment process increases the
lifespan of your bearings and
significantly reduces the chance of
damage
you